SOURCE: World Health Organization (WHO)
TITLE: Hepatitis B
URL: https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/hepatitis-b
DATE_ACCESSED: 2025-12-21
TOPIC: General Diseases
--------------------------------------------------

Overview
Hepatitis B is an infection of the liver caused by the hepatitis B virus. The infection can be acute (short and severe) or chronic (long term).

Hepatitis B can cause a chronic infection and puts people at high risk of death from cirrhosis and liver cancer.

It can spread through contact with infected body fluids like blood, saliva, vaginal fluids and semen. It can also be passed from a mother to her baby.

Hepatitis B can be prevented with a safe and effective vaccine. The vaccine is usually given soon after birth with boosters a few weeks later. It offers nearly 100% protection against the virus.

Hepatitis B is a major global health problem. The burden of infection is highest in the WHO Western Pacific Region and the WHO African Region, where 97 million and 65 million people, respectively, are chronically infected. Sixty-one million people are infected in the WHO South-East Asia Region, 15 million in the WHO Eastern Mediterranean Region, 11 million in the WHO in the WHO European Region and 5 million in the WHO Region of the Americas.

Transmission
In highly endemic areas, hepatitis B is most commonly spread from mother to child at birth (perinatal transmission) or through horizontal transmission, especially from an infected child to an uninfected child during the first 5 years of life. The development of chronic infection is very common in infants infected from their mothers or before the age of 5 years.

Hepatitis B is also spread by needlestick injury, tattooing, piercing and exposure to infected blood and body fluids, such as saliva and menstrual, vaginal and seminal fluids. Transmission of the virus may also occur through the sharing or reuse of contaminated needles and syringes or sharp objects either in health care settings, in the community or among persons who inject drugs. Sexual transmission is more prevalent in unvaccinated persons with multiple sexual partners.

Hepatitis B infection acquired in adulthood leads to chronic hepatitis in less than 5% of cases, whereas infection in infancy and early childhood leads to chronic hepatitis in about 95% of cases. This is the basis for strengthening and prioritizing infant and childhood vaccination.

Symptoms

Most people do not experience any symptoms when newly infected.

Some people have acute illness with symptoms that last several weeks:

yellowing of the skin and eyes (jaundice)
dark urine
feeling very tired
nausea
vomiting
pain in the abdomen.
When severe, acute hepatitis can lead to liver failure, which can lead to death.

Although most people will recover from acute illness, some people with chronic hepatitis B will develop progressive liver disease and complications like cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma (liver cancer). These diseases can be fatal.

HBV-HIV coinfection
About 1% of persons living with HBV infection (2.7 million people) are also infected with HIV. Conversely, the global prevalence of HBV infection in HIV-infected persons is 7.4%. Since 2015, WHO has recommended treatment for everyone diagnosed with HIV infection, regardless of the stage of disease. Tenofovir, which is included in the treatment combinations recommended as first-line therapy for HIV infection, is also active against HBV.

Diagnosis
It is not possible on clinical grounds to differentiate hepatitis B from hepatitis caused by other viral agents; hence laboratory confirmation of the diagnosis is essential. Several blood tests are available to diagnose and monitor people with hepatitis B. Some laboratory tests can be used to distinguish acute and chronic infections, whilst other can assess and monitor the severity of liver disease. Physical examination, ultrasound and elastography can also be performed to assess degree of liver fibrosis and scarring and monitor progression of liver disease. WHO recommends that all blood donations be tested for hepatitis B to ensure blood safety and avoid accidental transmission.

As of 2022, 13% of all people estimated to be living with hepatitis B were aware of their infection, while 3% (7 million) of the people living with chronic hepatitis B were on treatment. According to latest WHO estimates, the proportion of children under five years of age chronically infected with HBV dropped to just under 1% in 2019 down from around 5% in the pre-vaccine era ranging from the 1980s to the early 2000s.

In settings with intermediate and high Hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) seroprevalence in the general population (defined as >2% HBsAg seroprevalence), WHO recommends that all adults have access to and be offered HBsAg testing with linkage to prevention and care and treatment services as needed. WHO also recommends targeted testing, in all settings, of people with suspicions of liver disease, blood donors, and all pregnant women, the latter in order to provide the opportunity to institute measures for prevention of mother-to-child transmission (MTCT). In addition, WHO recommends testing among specific high-risk groups, including migrants from endemic regions, partners or family members of infected persons, health-care workers, people who inject drugs (PWID), people in prisons and other closed settings, men who have sex with men (MSM) sex workers, transgender people and people living with HIV.

Treatment
There is no specific treatment for acute hepatitis B. Chronic hepatitis B can be treated with antiviral medications. 

Care for people with acute hepatitis B should focus on managing sympoms. They should eat a healthy diet and drink plenty of liquids to prevent dehydration from vomiting and diarrhoea.

Chronic hepatitis B infection can be treated with oral medicines, including tenofovir or entecavir.

Treatment can

slow the advance of cirrhosis
reduce cases of liver cancer
improve long term survival.
Most people who start hepatitis B treatment must continue it for life.

Prevention
Hepatitis B is preventable with a vaccine.

All babies should receive the hepatitis B vaccine as soon as possible after birth (within 24 hours). This is followed by two or three doses of hepatitis B vaccine at least four weeks apart.

Booster vaccines are not usually required for people who have completed the three-dose vaccination series.

The vaccine protects against hepatitis B for at least 20 years and probably for life.

Hepatitis B can be passed from mother to child. This can be prevented by taking antiviral medicines to prevent transmission, in addition to the vaccine shortly after birth. 

To reduce the risk of getting or spreading hepatitis B:

practice safe sex by using condoms;
avoid sharing needles or any equipment used for injecting drugs, piercing, or tattooing;
wash your hands thoroughly with soap and water after coming into contact with blood, body fluids, or contaminated surfaces; and 
get a hepatitis B vaccine if working in a health-care setting.